Added auto resource detection proposal (#111)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0111-auto-resource-detection.md

# Automatic Resource Detection

> Describes a mechanism to support auto-detection of resource information.

Reviewer: This should be a one-line summary that describes the changed introduced by this document, not the document itself.

```suggestion
Introduce a mechanism to support auto-detection of resources.
```

## Motivation

> Resource information, i.e. attributes associated with the entity producing telemetry, can currently be supplied to tracer and meter providers or appended in custom exporters. In addition to this, it would be useful to have a mechanism to automatically detect resource information from the host (e.g. from an environment variable or from aws, gcp, etc metadata) and apply this to all kinds of telemetry. This will in many cases prevent users from having to manually configure resource information.

Reviewer: Please add line breaks at least every sentence, otherwise it is impossible to comment on specific parts of the paragraph.

Author: 👍 - updated this to use a line wrapper extension

# Automatic Resource Detection

Describes a mechanism to support auto-detection of resource information.

## Motivation

> Resource information, i.e. attributes associated with the entity producing telemetry, can currently be supplied to tracer and meter providers or appended in custom exporters. In addition to this, it would be useful to have a mechanism to automatically detect resource information from the host (e.g. from an environment variable or from aws, gcp, etc metadata) and apply this to traces and metrics. This will in many cases prevent users from having to manually configure resource information.

Reviewer 2: > and apply this to traces and metrics

And logs.

Author: Update all similar reference in this doc to "all kinds of telemetry"

Note there are some existing implementations of this already in the SDKs (see [below](#prior-art-and-alternatives)), but nothing currently in the specification.

## Explanation

In order to apply auto-detected resource information to traces & metrics, a user will need to:

> - Configure which resource detector(s) they would like to run (e.g. AWS EC2 detector)

Reviewer 2: Is explicit configuration required? Could we run all cloud providers and take the first one that succeeds? If none succeed then the Detect() call fails.

Author: I probably should have added this as an Open question. I've suggested a similar approach to what was in the OpenCensus spec which dicates that cloud-vendor specific detection must not be included in the SDK (and thus would require some configuration), but that may not be necessary. As you point out below, the code to detect instance metadata is usually trivial: lookup an environment variable(s) or get a text response from a known endpoint.

If we do allow cloud vendor-specific detectors to be included in the SDK that raises a few related questions:

- Do we want to enforce that vendor libraries cannot be included in detectors?
- Are we open to any cloud providers adding detection code here as long as they follow the above rule? (other than just major ones)
- Do we attempt detection for all cloud providers by default? (including non-major ones)

Reviewer 2: > Do we want to enforce that vendor libraries cannot be included in detectors?

Yes IMO

> Are we open to any cloud providers adding detection code here as long as they follow the above rule? (other than just major ones)

Yes as long as they add it to OT libraries for all languages.

> Do we attempt detection for all cloud providers by default? (including non-major ones)
If yes, then are there any cases where we would need to let users override this?

Yeah this does seem like it could be tricky given the number of cloud providers and that they're on the rise. Could limit it by some factors, like "must have X% market share" to be included in autodetection but any legitimate provider can still add a provider as a fallback if they don't meet that threshold?

I think ideally we would run all autodetectors in parallel with a relatively small time limit (we use 1s by default in SignalFx agent but I don't have any hard data supporting what the correct value should be).

Reviewer 3: I would start with requiring explicit enumeration of detectors by the user. It can always be extended to an auto-detector.

Author: Note the overarching question here is:

"Is it okay for cloud-vendor specific detectors to live in the SDK directly as long as they don't include any third party libraries?"

I'll wait for a couple more opinions before updating the OTEP but if there is general consensus that this is okay, then I'll get rid of the notes about custom detectors living in separate packages.

Note this means that if the user wants to make use of auto-detected resource information, they will be required to explicitly pass the resource to the trace and/or metric provider(s).

If multiple detectors are configured, and more than one of these successfully detects a resource, the resources will be merged according to the Merge interface already defined in the specification, i.e. the earliest matched resource's attributes will take precedence. Each detector may be run in parallel, but to ensure deterministic results, the resources must be merged in the order the detectors were added.

A default implementation of a detector that reads resource data from the `OTEL_RESOURCE` environment variable will be included in the SDK. The environment variable will contain of a list of key value pairs, and these are expected to be represented in a format similar to the [W3C Correlation-Context](https://github.com/w3c/correlation-context/blob/master/correlation_context/HTTP_HEADER_FORMAT.md#header-value), i.e.: `key1=value1,key2=value2`. This detector must always be configured as the first detector by default.

> Custom resource detectors related to specific environments (e.g. specific cloud vendors) must be implemented outside of the SDK, and users will need to import these separately.

Reviewer 2: Resource detection is fairly trivial for all the major cloud platforms. You make an HTTP call to some well-known endpoint and get JSON or some plain text data. I don't think we necessarily need to use third party libraries which may bring in more dependencies than we care for. This would also simplify the number of dependencies for users as it'd all live in the SDK.

Reviewer 4: Adding generic and configurable detectors as a package would be useful. Providing not only the detector interface, but also including configurable Environment Variable and HTTP detectors could be broadly useful.

For example,

```
type Resourcer interface {
	Resource(io.Reader) (*Resource, error)
}

type HTTPDetector struct {
	Client *http.Client
	Request http.Request
	Resourcer  Resourcer
}

func (d HTTPDetector) Detect(ctx context.Context) (*Resource, error) {
	resp, err := d.Client.Do(d.Request)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	defer resp.Body.Close()
	return d.Resourcer.Resource(resp.Body)
}
```

Author: If we have default detectors, they should just be part of the SDK imo (as per the env variable detector mentioned in this OTEP). A generic HTTP detector could be useful as an implementation detail, but probably doesn't need to be mentioned in the spec.

In order to allow users to be able to use different detectors for different trace or metric providers, the detector(s) must be configured against a resource provider, and users can create multiple providers if desired.

## Internal details

As described above, the following will be added to the Resource SDK specification:

- An interface for "detectors", to retrieve resource information
- Specification for the resource provider, which can have custom detectors added, and will return a merged resource
- Details of the default "From Environment Variable" detector implementation described above

This is a relatively small proposal so is easiest to explain the details with a code example:

### Usage

The following example in Go creates a trace provider that uses resource information automatically detected from AWS or GCP:

Assumes a dependency has been added on the `otel api`, `otel sdk`, `otel awsdetector`, and `otel gcpdetector` packages.

```go
rp := resource.NewMustProvider()
rp.AddDetectors(awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE, gcpdetector.GKE)
resource := rp.AutoDetect(ctx)

> tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.WithResource(resource))

Reviewer 2: I think it's good to be able to have it explicit like this but would be nice to have a simple out of the box default assuming autodetection would work based on above:

`sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.DetectResource())` or `sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.MustDetectResource())`

Author: I like this suggestion - it makes up for one of the trade-offs I'd mentioned below, and makes initialization much simpler.

I added your code below but allowing detectors to be provided as parameters (even if we do require configuration of detectors, this could still be initialized in one line). Depending on the outcome of the thread above, I may remove the extra parameters.

```

There is no change to how the resource is given to the provider, so no changes are required to the existing spec / implementation.

### Components

#### Detector

The Detector interface will simply return a Resource:

```go
type Detector interface {
    Detect(ctx context.Context) (*Resource, error)
}
```

> If a detector is not able to detect a resource, it must return an empty resource so that the result of each call to `Detect` can be merged.

Reviewer 5: `nil` resource should work fine for Go as well.
In other languages it might be different, as long as it leads to the same result.

I think there is also a difference between empty and missing resource in OTLP? See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/b54688569186e0b862bf7462a983ccf2c50c0547/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto#L30

Author: Hmm need to confirm if that is an important distinction. Note the current typescript implemention returns an empty resource.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

- The resource provider adds a small amount of complexity that may not be necessary if we can't think of any use cases where a user would want to configure different sets of detectors, but omitting it enforces that restriction. We could add a `global.SetResourceProvider(rp)` function similar to the convention for metrics & traces, but there isn't much value in doing this as the resource provider would only be used during initialization.
- One alternative option to this proposal would be to supply a resource provider directly to the metric or trace provider instead of, or as an additional option to, a static resource. That would result in marginally simpler setup code where the user doesn't need to call `AutoDetect` themselves.
- In this proposal, no resource detection will happen by default. It may be preferable to make trace / metric providers use the default resource provider if no resource is supplied. This would be in line with the behaviour of the current Java implementation - see [below](#prior-art-and-alternatives)

> - In the case of an error at resource detection time, another alternative would be to start a background thread to retry following some strategy, but it's not clear that there would be much value in doing this, and it would add considerable unnecessary complexity.

Reviewer 5: If resource detection is a must, it should just crash an application probably to make the behavior predictable.
Otherwise we may run into same metrics having different resource attributes from time to time / not having resource at all, which will be problematic for aggregation.

Reviewer 3: can always add an option `detector := detectorBuilder.crashOnError(true).build()`

Author: I think that's captured by "These options will be provided as separate interfaces to let the user decide how to recover from failure, e.g. `DetectResource` & `MustDetectResource`"

Assumes a dependency has been added on the `otel api`, `otel sdk`, `otel awsdetector`, and `otel gcpdetector` packages.

```go
rp := resource.NewMustProvider() // or NewProvider (see below)
rp.AddDetectors(awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE, gcpdetector.GKE)
resource := rp.AutoDetect(ctx)
tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.WithResource(resource))
```

Or more simply:

```go
tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.MustDetectResource(awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE, gcpdetector.GKE)) // or DetectResource (see below)
```

In the case of both `WithResource` & `DetectResource` being supplied, the detected resource will be merged with the supplied resource (with the supplied resource taking precedence).

### Components

#### Detector

The Detector interface will simply return a Resource:

```go
type Detector interface {
    Detect(ctx context.Context) (*Resource, error)
}
```

If a detector is not able to detect a resource, it must return an uninitialized resource such that the result of each call to `Detect` can be merged.

#### Provider

A Provider will have a function to add detectors & to retrieve the auto-detected reosurce information:

```go

> type Provider struct {

Reviewer 3: Seems like Provider is just a composite Detector. Fewer concepts is better.

Reviewer 4: I think @yurishkuro is correct here, and it was alluded to in the duplicate examples you gave above.

If we just went with the second approach:

```go
￼tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.MustDetectResource(awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE, gcpdetector.GKE)) // or DetectResource
￼```

There would not be a need to add another provider.

Author: For the most part I agree, so I've removed this from the otep.

One disadvantage of removing this is that for each trace / metric provider you create, you will need to supply the list of detectors you want to run (rather than supplying a resource or provider) .. but that's not a huge issue, as you can just declare a list of detectors and re-use this (see the new example code)

### Existing OpenTelemetry implementations

- Resource detection implementation in JS SDK [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/tree/master/packages/opentelemetry-resources): The JS implementation is very similar to this proposal. This proposal adds a resource provider instead of just having a global `DetectResources` function. In addition, vendor specific resource detection code is currently in the resource package, so this would need to be separated.
- Environment variable resource detection in Java SDK [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/resources/EnvVarResource.java): This implementation does not currently include a detector interface, and this detector is used by default for trace and meter providers (so this proposal would introduce a breaking change in its current form)

## Open questions

- Does this interfere with any other upcoming specification changes related to resources?

> - If custom detectors need to live outside the core repo, what is the expectation regarding where they should be hosted?

Reviewer 4: I think this could follow the same model we have for vendor exporters, in that they are hosted in a vendor repository.

Author: 👍 I agree that would make sense. Will update based on the outcome of the discussion above.

## Future possibilities

> When the Collector is run as an agent, the same interface, shared with the Go SDK, could be used to append resource information detected from the host to all kinds of telemetry in a Processor (probably as an extension to the existing Resource Processor). This would require a translation from the SDK resource to the collector's internal representation of a resource.

Reviewer 4: :100:

Author: FYI I ended up implementing a [resource detection processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/309) in the Collector to unblock some work I needed to get done rather than waiting for this OTEP, but happy to look into refactoring this in the future if we still think its worthwhile

detects a resource, the resources will be merged according to the Merge
interface already defined in the specification, i.e. the earliest matched
resource's attributes will take precedence. Each detector may be run in
parallel, but to ensure deterministic results, the resources must be merged in
the order the detectors were added.

A default implementation of a detector that reads resource data from the
`OTEL_RESOURCE` environment variable will be included in the SDK. The
environment variable will contain of a list of key value pairs, and these are
expected to be represented in a format similar to the [W3C
Correlation-Context](https://github.com/w3c/correlation-context/blob/master/correlation_context/HTTP_HEADER_FORMAT.md#header-value),
except that additional semi-colon delimited metadata is not supported, i.e.:
`key1=value1,key2=value2`. If the user does not specify any resource, this
detector will be run by default.

Custom resource detectors related to specific environments (e.g. specific cloud
vendors) must be implemented as packages separate to the core SDK, and users
will need to import these separately.

## Internal details

> As described above, the following will be added to the Resource SDK

Reviewer: As stated in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/111#issuecomment-656034077, I'm not sure if this should be added directly to the Resource SDK spec. I thinklanguages should be encouraged to implement this as a separate, optional package.

specification:

- An interface for "detectors", to retrieve resource information
- Specification for a global function to merge resources returned by a set of
  detectors
- Details of the "from environment variable" detector implementation as
  described above
- Specification that default detection (from environment variable) runs once on
  startup, and is used by all tracer & meter providers by default if no custom
  resource is supplied

### Usage

The following example in Go creates a tracer and meter provider that uses
resource information automatically detected from AWS or GCP:

Assumes a dependency has been added on the `otel/api`, `otel/sdk`,
`otel/awsdetector`, and `otel/gcpdetector` packages.

```go
resource, _ := sdkresource.Detect(ctx, 5 * time.Second, awsdetector.ec2, gcpdetector.gce)
tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.WithResource(resource))
mp := push.New(..., push.WithResource(resource))
```

### Components

#### Detector

The `Detector` interface will simply contain a `Detect` function that returns a
Resource.

The `Detect` function should contain a mechanism to timeout and cancel the

> request. If a detector is not able to detect a resource, it must return an

Reviewer: > the request

Which request? First time the word "request" appears in this OTEP. I think resource detection must not perform network I/O, as resources are immutable and thus initializing resources must happen before telemetry can be collected. A timeout is out of the question.

One way to lift this restriction would be to specify a way to do this asynchronously, and delay the first call to export() until resources are detected. But this warrants a whole new OTEP. For now, I'd say anything which could require a timeout is out of the question as input for resources.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure that this is something that needs to be in the spec, but at least in the Go SDK this timeout/cancel mechanism would be provided by the `context` referenced in [this comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/111#discussion_r448612875).  I think that's why it would be important to include the `context` even if it were not being used as an OpenTelemetry Context.

Author: > Which request? First time the word "request" appears in this OTEP. I think resource detection must not perform network I/O, as resources are immutable and thus initializing resources must happen before telemetry can be collected.

Changed the wording to `operation` since not all detectors would not be creating any kind of request. I don't think it's unreasonable for detectors to perform network I/O synchronously if it is expected to be (relatively) quick, especially if a user specifically pulls in that package. Indeed I think would not be uncommon for looking up resource information: I think the convention by all major cloud vendors is to provide instance metadata via `http://169.254.169.254`

> One way to lift this restriction would be to specify a way to do this asynchronously, and delay the first call to export() until resources are detected. But this warrants a whole new OTEP. For now, I'd say anything which could require a timeout is out of the question as input for resources.

I don't think this would be worth the complexity. We'd have to make sure the resource information is applied to any "pending" telemetry before being exported which would not be trivial.

Reviewer: Good point with it being the users choice. I just hope that most resources can be provided via things like environment variables or local files. For example, cloud instance metadata could probably queried by the backend if the resource contains some sort of instance ID?

uninitialized resource such that the result of each call to `Detect` can be
merged.

#### Global Function

The SDK will also provide a global `Detect` function. This will take a timeout
duration and a set of detectors that should be run and merged in order as
described in the intro, and return a resource.

### Error Handling

In the case of one or more detectors raising an error, there are two reasonable
options:

> 1. Ignore that detector, and continue with a warning (likely meaning we will

Reviewer: Please compare https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/error-handling.md

Author: I don't think there's anything here that contradicts those guidelines given that detection code runs on initialization.

Usually we would "assume that users would prefer to lose telemetry data rather than have the library significantly change the behavior of the instrumented application", but given that this code runs on initialization, this seems to come under pont no. 2: "The API or SDK may _fail fast_ and cause the application to fail on initialization".

Having the detection code fail fast, and leaving it up to the user to handle this if desired seems reasonable?

Reviewer: Sorry, that was a rather lazy and vague comment from me 😄 I guess what struck me as odd here is in what detail you describe error handling here. I think most of the specification does at most say "must not throw exceptions" and otherwise this document is the only thing that has more details.

specification:

- An interface for "detectors", to retrieve resource information
- Specification for a global function to merge resources returned by a set of
  detectors
- Details of the "from environment variable" detector implementation as
  described above
- Specification that default detection (from environment variable) runs once on
  startup, and is used by all tracer & meter providers by default if no custom
  resource is supplied

This is a relatively small proposal so it is easiest to explain the details with
a code example:

### Usage

The following example in Go creates a tracer and meter provider that uses
resource information automatically detected from AWS or GCP:

Assumes a dependency has been added on the `otel/api`, `otel/sdk`,
`otel/awsdetector`, and `otel/gcpdetector` packages.

```go
resource, _ := sdkresource.Detect(ctx, 5 * time.Second, awsdetector.ec2, gcpdetector.gce)
tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.WithResource(resource))
mp := push.New(..., push.WithResource(resource))
```

### Components

#### Detector

The Detector interface will simply return a Resource:

```go
type Detector interface {

>     Detect(ctx context.Context) (*Resource, error)

Reviewer 7: What is the context used for here?

Author: This is just a go specific thing, where context always has to be passed around manually. For most other languages, ignore it. I should probably change these snippets to psuedo-code.

Reviewer: The telemetry context (which is indistinguishable from Go's context because it got re-used for that) is very meaningful for OpenTelemetry, so requiring it or not is an important distinction.

Reviewer 8: I suggest we remove it from here, as it seems to be a Go-specific thing ;)

Author: > The telemetry context (which is indistinguishable from Go's context because it got re-used for that) is very meaningful for OpenTelemetry, so requiring it or not is an important distinction.

That is a good point and I had not thought about that. I had only included the context in this code snippet for the regular Go usage of context. I don't think there's any requirement to pass the telemetry context into this function, but I'm happy to learn if there is a use case for that.

> I suggest we remove it from here, as it seems to be a Go-specific thing ;)

I removed the code snippets (other than the `Usage` example) & replaced with slightly clearer wording.

## Internal details

As described above, the following will be added to the Resource SDK specification:

- An interface for "detectors", to retrieve resource information, that can be supplied to tracer and meter providers
- Specification for how to merge resources returned by the configured detectors, and with a manually supplied resource as described above
- Details of the default "From Environment Variable" detector implementation as described above

This is a relatively small proposal so is easiest to explain the details with a code example:

### Usage

The following example in Go creates a tracer and meter provider that uses resource information automatically detected from AWS or GCP:

Assumes a dependency has been added on the `otel/api`, `otel/sdk`, `otel/awsdetector`, and `otel/gcpdetector` packages.

```go
resources := resource.Detector[]{awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE, gcpdetector.GKE}
tp := sdktrace.NewProvider(sdktrace.MustDetectResource(resources)) // or DetectResource (see below)
mp := push.New(..., push.MustDetectResource(resources))

> ```

Reviewer 9: I think we should keep the Resource building separate from the SDKs. Instead of a `WithXXX` argument accepting detectors, why not have a resource library that simply builds a resource using the detectors you give it, and then pass the built up Resource to the SDK? IOW I'd prefer if both Tracing and Metric SDKs continue to support `WithResource`.

```
  resource := resource.Must(resource.Detect(awsdetector.EC2, gcpdetector.GCE))
  tp := sdktrace.NewProvicer(sdktrace.WithResource(resource))
```

Reviewer 9: A related remark: caching inside the detectors sounds like more trouble than it's worth. I would advocate for users to simply evaluate the resource detectors they need and merge manually.

Author: I originally had something closer to your suggestion, but thought passing in detectors directly would result in a slightly simpler API for users. What's the main reason(s) for wanting resource building to be separate from the SDK? The SDKs can always support both `WithResource` & `DetectResource` (maybe having both options adds some confusion?)

I do get your point on caching though. That's definitely one issue with the current proposal.

Reviewer 4: For reference, the removal was motivated here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/111#discussion_r435617411

Reviewer 9: OK, sounds good.

Author: I've actually ended up changing this to be exactly as Josh suggested. See the third bullet point in the trade off / mitigations section for reasoning

### Components

#### Detector

The Detector interface will simply return a Resource:

```go
type Detector interface {
    Detect(ctx context.Context) (*Resource, error)
}
```

If a detector is not able to detect a resource, it must return an uninitialized resource such that the result of each call to `Detect` can be merged.

#### Provider

In addition to supplying a way to associate a Resource with a tracer or meter provider, i.e. `WithResource`, the SDK will supply a way to associate a set of Detectors with a tracer or meter provider, i.e. `DetectResource`.

Because the same detectors will be used across different providers, if detection is not relatively trivial, the results should be cached inside the detector.

### Error Handling

In the case of one or more detectors raising an error, there are two reasonable options:

1. Ignore that detector, and continue with a warning (likely meaning we will continue without expected resource information)
2. Crash the application (raise a panic)

These options will be provided as separate interfaces to let the user decide how to recover from failure, e.g. `DetectResource` & `MustDetectResource`

## Trade-offs and mitigations

> - In the case of an error at resource detection time, another alternative would be to start a background thread to retry following some strategy, but it's not clear that there would be much value in doing this, and it would add considerable unnecessary complexity.

Reviewer 10: I don't believe this will work, since you state that "the resources must be merged in the order the detectors were added". If there were a detector B after the one that failed, call it A, B would have to wait for A's detection to be complete. So there's no real value in making A do detection in a background thread if it blocks B anyways.
